---
title: "Determinacy of Infinite Games"
subtitle: ""
summary: ""

date: 2022-01-29T17:30:00+05:30
lastmod: 2022-01-29T17:30:00+05:30

tags: ["topology", "cantor-set", "games"]

math: true

draft: true
featured: false
---

I recently read a 1953 paper on _Infinite Games with Perfect Information_ by Gale and Stewart[^GS53]. The paper tries to characterise two-player turn-based games in which one of the players has a winning strategy. If a player has a winning strategy, then they can ensure that they always win no matter how the other player plays. 

In this paper, we only see games without chance moves. The way the game proceeds is completely determined by the initial position and the decisions taken by the players. For instance, we look at games such as chess, checkers, Go, Nim, and Connect 4.  We rule out games such as Snakes and Ladders, Ludo, and Catan where dice are rolled or cards are drawn. 

They only consider games with perfect information. No information is hidden from the players: both players know the rules and the state of the game at all times. This excludes games like Poker and Battleship. 

## The Setup

A game can be seen as a set of positions, along with a set of rules that dictate the states one is allowed to move to. We can represent a game as a rooted tree, whose each vertex is a a state of the game. The game begins at the root, and the player whose turn it is to play picks a neighbour to move the state to.
 
A _play_ of the game is a traversal through this tree starting from the root.  

For example in chess, the state of the game is completely described by the position of the pieces, whether the players have castled, and whose turn it is to play next. Unlike chess, we do not require that both players play alternating turns in our games. 

They encode a game as a set $X$ of positions, or states or configurations. 

The players have _strategies_ that determine how they would play when it's their turn. A player has a _winning strategy_ if they can always win irrespective of which strategy the other player employs. Of course, it is not possible for both players to have a winning strategy. However, a surprising result is that there exist games where neither of the players has a winning strategy. 

They showed that there exist games that are not strictly determined. They then tried to characterize games that are determined. I found this really interesting, and I want to share some of the results from the paper.    

A game is represented by an infinite rooted tree $T$. Each vertex of the tree corresponds to a position of the game. Each vertex belong to either player 1 or player 2. A play of the game corresponds to an infinite traversal of states in the tree. 

An objective for player 1 is a set of plays. 

{{< insert-svg filename="states" caption="An example of a rooted tree.">}}

## An infinite game that is not determined

The paper shows an example of a infinite game that is not strictly determined. For every strategy $\sigma$ of Player 1, Player 2 has a strategy such that the resulting play is winning for Player 2. Similarly, no matter what strategy Player 2 picks, Player 1 has a strategy such that they win the game. In other words, none of the players have a winning strategy. The game goes as follows:




## A topology of games

We consider a topology generated by _cones_. 

## Some examples of determined games

Games in which the winning objective is an open set are determined. 

---

If you found this interesting, I recommend that you give the original paper a read. A follow up is a paper by Donald Martin[^Mar75] where he proves that all Borel games are determined. 



[^GS53]: Gale, David and Stewart, F. M.. "13. Infinite Games with Perfect Information". _Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume II_, Princeton University Press, 1953, pp. 245-266. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400881970-014

[^Mar75]: Donald A. Martin. Borel determinacy. _Annals of Mathematics_, 102(2):363–371, 1975.